in 1588 Elizabeth Navy defeated the
Spanish Armada in the greatest English
victory since Agincourt the celebrations
were long and magnificent the procession
to the Thanksgiving service that some
Paul's Cathedral was the grandest since
it is Ava's coronation the captured
Spanish banners were hung up as trophies
and a commemorative medal was struck
with the inscription God's winds blew
and they were scattered and the English
really thought that God had fought on
their side they were the new chosen race
God's own Protestant people England
stood proud and Elizabeth and her reign
were their Zenith
it was the golden age if it is a besom
England
the Great Houses Elizabeth courtiers
built are a visible tangible expression
of their confidence exuberance and
wealth
unlike her father King Henry the eighth
Elizabeth built no palaces nothing she
no need to because her courtiers and
favorites built for her sequester for
Hatton the Lord Chancellor already had a
great house at Holden me but he told
Elizabeth he would build another one
nearby at Kirby that will be dedicated
to her as a shrine to a Holy Saint
Elizabeth had ceased to be a mere queen
and she become instead
Gloriana England's national icon
she was painted again and again
always dazzling always glorious always
triumphant
even in her late 50s she has the face
eternal youth
but Elizabeth the woman was aging the
goddess had feet of clay
[Music]
literature flourished as never before
Shakespeare wrote his first plays some
of them commissioned by the Queen but
new theater brought new and dangerous
ideas
one of Shakespeare's plays would soon be
used in an attempt to overthrow her
she had ruled for 30 years loved by her
subjects loyally served by her courtiers
but as she aged new generation was
growing restless she would have to fight
as never before to hang on to power it
is September 1588 Queen Elizabeth has
been locked inside her chamber
for some days all attempts to contact
her have failed the court is in panic
despite fears to the contrary the Queen
is alive
but she is not well
[Music]
I most humbly beseech Your Majesty to
pardon your old servant to be thus bold
in sending to know how my gracious lady
death for my own case I continued still
your medicine and it amends much better
than any other thing that hath been
given me
with the continuance of my wanted prayer
for your Majesty's most happy
preservation I humbly kiss your foot
Your Majesty is most faithful and
obedient servant our Leicester
Elizabeth would never receive another of
his letters Robert Dudley Earl of
Leicester favorite of the Queen a friend
and counselor for the last 30 years of
the nearest thing she'd ever had to a
lover was dead
in the next two years
a succession of court notables followed
Robert Dudley to the grave Sir Francis
Walsingham Secretary of State and
spymaster extraordinary so Christopher
Hatton Lord Chancellor builder of Kirby
Hall
Ambrose Dudley Earl of Warwick
brother of Robert of the old guard only
William Cecil Lord Burleigh remained the
gaps in Courtin Council would have to be
filled but the Queen had always hated
change and instead of bringing in new
blood she replaced father's with their
sons Robert Devereux Earl of Essex was
Robert Douglas stepson
it was 21 vain high-spirited impatient
and brilliant with a fondness for
dueling he was much admired at court and
was viewed by all as a man destined for
greatness he aspired to his stepfathers
role of a great noble and a military
leader
[Music]
Robert Cecil was the second son of Lord
Burleigh he was 25 careful the Stute and
coming with a fondness for corresponding
encode he was mocked mostly behind his
back his short stature his hunched
shoulders but his mind was razor sharp
he aspired to his father's role of
statesman and political leader Robert
Cecil and the Earl of Essex were the new
generation the new generation at
different ideas from the old so Robert
Cecil for example made a much sharper
distinction between the service of the
state and the service of the Queen than
his father William whatever have done
and the Earl of Essex and much more
grandiose ideas about the power and the
independence of the nobility than his
stepfather Lester they were both young
men in a hurry waiting impatiently for
the aged Queen to get out of the way and
she knew it
[Music]
Essex charm the Queen and she was
flattered by his youthful attentions but
she was 55 and he was 21
if she loved him it was partly as her
gigolo partly as her son he was gifted
but he could also be immature and unruly
like a strict parent Elizabeth resisted
his demands for a military command
[Music]
Robert Cecil was already an MP
Elizabeth called him her elf or Lester
his liking her pick me she respected his
political instincts but she was wary of
and was never able to trust him but she
had his father
she made him a privy counsellor but she
stopped short of giving him his father's
old job
the new generation would have to wait
it's turn she continued to rely instead
on the man who'd served her since the
start of her reign whom she trusted
above all others Robert's essence father
Lord Burleigh
[Music]
I do entreat heaven daily for your
longer life else will my people and
myself stand in need of cordial too
you are in all things to me Alpha and
Omega
she wouldn't let him retire even when he
was in his late seventies gouty death
and visibly shrunk with age but in the
summer of 1598 Birla fell dangerously
ill Elizabeth sent him medicines letters
on one occasion she even fed him soup
with a spoon with her own hand to no
avail in september 1598 Burleigh died
for 40 years Burley had carried the
heavy administrative burden of running
the day-to-day Government of India
it wasn't as risky as the essentially
noble role of the Queen's military
leftenant which have been fulfilled by
Birla's old sparring partner the Earl of
Leicester but nor was it as prestigious
which is why in death the bureaucrat
burly where's the third robes and the
gilded Armour that symbolized the role
of the nobleman a role that he'd shunned
in life
I have this vision of Elizabeth coming
to visit him when he was dying
there's his old woman stamping along the
passage with her wig askew with her
pockmarked face disguised with
horrendous white LED makeup huge
darman's bad-tempered and upset and
getting to his bedroom and there's his
poor old man breathing very heavily
hardly conscious she must have been torn
between the agony of losing a good
advisor and the agony of losing a very
close friend it's like losing one's
parents however old one is it's still
the most ghastly shock and for her he
was the closest thing to a parent he'd
kept a guiding wise hand on her shoulder
all the way through her rather
tempestuous youth and middle age and
suddenly that guiding hand was being
removed and you know she must have been
very bereft
in 1596 England once again face the
threat of invasion
Spain remain the most powerful country
in Europe and King Philip was still
determined for destroy Elizabeth and her
island nation in March his army had
captured Kallen now he had troops within
20 miles of England and a great fleet
was gathering at Cadiz in Spain to
transport them confronted with this new
danger Elizabethan England galvanized
itself into action the Queen set aside
her doubts about military action and her
courtiers their divisions and it was
decided to send an expedition to Cadiz
to destroy the new Armada import before
it had even set sail the strategist and
commander of the expedition was the Earl
of Essex but the man who financed it and
organized it was Robert Cecil Essex had
finally got the military command he
craved and on the day he put to sea
Robert Cecil was at last confirmed as
Elizabeth's chief secretary the new
generation had arrived in the early
hours of Sunday the 20th of June 120
English and Dutch ships attacked Cadiz
the Spanish were taken off guard that
invasion fleet was destroyed
the town was captured and plundered for
booty Spain had again been humbled
England and Essex had triumphed
[Music]
[Applause]
you have made me famous dreadful and
renowned not more for victory than for
your courage I care not so much for
being Queen as that I am sovereign of
such subjects Essex was now a popular
hero and the burning of Cadiz was built
up into something to rival the defeat of
the Spanish Armada itself but the Armada
only had a single heroine Elizabeth
Cadiz though was Essex his victory and
at the service of thanksgiving in San
Paul's Cathedral the congregation burst
into spontaneous applause when the
preacher sang Essex his praises to the
skies
[Music]
felissa pyth it was a novel and
disturbing development her previous
favorite Lester Essex his stepfather had
actually been hated now a man whom she
had created was her rival in popular
affection but popularity was the basis
of Elizabeth monarchy it could not be
shared with a subject as a first step
all further popular celebrations of
cdiz were banned but London continued
to glorify their new hero some preachers
even compared him to Julius Caesar the
greatest of the Romans the city that had
adored the Queen since the beginning of
her reign had found a new idol
why's a man that Essex would have
modified the queen by keeping a low
profile but Essex was not wise and
ambition and fallacy got the better of
him he commissioned an engraving of
himself in the style of a Roman Emperor
direct challenge to the Queen's royal
authority he threw his weight around of
court objecting whenever Elizabeth
honored another courtier and when the
Queen turned down his plea to launch
another attack on Spain he courted
public support behind her back
[Music]
Elizabeth was furious the conflict came
to a head when Essex and Elizabeth
disagreed about who was to be North
deputy of Armond the Queen
contemptuously dismissed the Earl's
arguments the Earl turned his back on
the Queen and the Queen irritated boxed
the Earl's ears at this point the Earl
half drew his sword on the Queen now to
strike somebody within the precincts of
the court was punished by the amputation
of the right hand to strike the Queen
was treason but before the unthinkable
could happen the Lord Admiral interposed
himself between Essex and the Queen then
withdrew to his country house whilst
Elizabeth was left to ponder the monster
that she created
[Music]
Elizabeth loved the theater but some
plays are as much about politics as
entertainment most dangerous was
Shakespeare's Richard ii which dealt
with the making and the unmaking the
king I give this Heavyweight from off my
head in my own hands
I'd give away my crown with my own
tongue deny my sacred state all pomp and
Majesty I do force where my acts decrees
and statutes I deny God save King Henry
on King Richard says and send him many
years of sunshine days the play tells a
story of the deposition of the rightful
anointed king rich of the second by
Henry Bolingbroke his cousin and the
military hero
Elizabeth identified herself
passionately with the deposed King I am
rich of the second new he not that she's
supposed to have said she also thought
that there were many potential
Bolingbroke surround Robert Cecil and
the Earl of Essex told her to her face
that they worshipped her behind her back
they were looking to the future after
her death and Elizabeth sometimes feared
they were plotting to depose her just
like Richard the second
when Shakespeare's play was printed the
following year the deposition scene had
been cut from the text we can guess that
the author and his publisher were given
hints that they'd been wise enough to
take a new tragedy bloodier than
anything in Shakespeare was now
unfolding in Ireland
in August 15 98 at yellow Ford in Ulster
Irish rebels ambushed a column of
English soldiers and cut them to pieces
[Music]
1,200 men lay dead or dying
it was the worst military defeat of
Elizabeth's reign
[Music]
the Catholic Irish have long resented
the occupation of their country by
Protestant England there had been
rebellions before but this one was much
more dangerous it had the support of
Spain king philip ii was dead but his
son had inherited his father's zeal the
avenge for the defeats of Cadiz and the
Armada he planned to land troops in
Ireland and to threaten England across
the Irish Sea
the Queen would have to act in spring of
$15.99 the largest English army
Elizabeth's reign landed on the east
coast of Ireland in command was her half
disgraced favorite the Earl of Essex
would pestered the Queen until she gave
him the post he wished to rehabilitate
himself in the Queen's favor he also
wanted to show that he was a real
soldier able to draw his sword on the
Queen's enemies just as he'd half-drawn
it on the Queen herself but the first
use that Essex made of his sword in
Ireland was to employ to usurp the
Queen's kingly prerogatives by knighting
in defiance of Elizabeth's explicit
instructions 38 of his captains turning
his sword against the Queen's enemies
proved more of a challenge
for months Elizabeth received little
news from Ireland and she became
increasingly frustrated but Essex's
failure to engage the enemy
if sickness in the army be the reason
why was not the action undertaken when
the army was in a better State
if winters approached why were the
summer months of July and August lost if
the spring were too soon and the summer
that followed otherwise spent then
surely we must conclude that none of the
four quarters of the year will be in
season for you
but essex did not meet his enemy in
battle instead he and the rebel leader
the Earl of Tyrone had a secret
rendezvous near Carrick Macross they
talked for half an hour alone and out of
earshot of their officers and they
parted on good terms
after six months in Ireland Essex has
spent 300 thousand pounds and lost
twelve thousand men to disease and
desertion that was incompetence
and now he had made a secret deal with
the rebel leader the sworn enemy of the
Queen that was close to treason her
reservations about her young courtiers
began to look justified they could not
be trusted
Robert Cecil began a secret
correspondence with James the sixth of
Scotland he have taken it upon himself
to pave the way for James's accession to
the English throne thereby ensuring his
own continuance in office
at first sight it seems an extraordinary
idea in London Scotland were old enemies
and Elizabeth had executed James's
mother Mary Stewart but James was the
obvious heir
he was Elizabeth closest male relative
he was an experienced ruler he was a
Protestant he already had two sons
sessile told James if he accepted his
advice and guidance he could expect a
peaceful accession to Elizabeth's throne
but Cecil had to proceed with care the
Queen had never named a successor and
had banned all talk of the matter at
court the secret must be carefully kept
he must have worried about security in
London but I imagined that he would have
been much more worried about security in
Edinburgh James the first was of England
and six of Scotland was notoriously
indiscreet and of course he was
surrounded by some fairly loose mais
people so it was important I think for
him to use code and trustworthy
messengers he would never know whether
the Queen if she did find out officially
wouldn't have lent her top and sacked
him and secondly of course it was a
splendid opportunity for his enemies to
accuse him of treason and treating with
the foreign power
at ten o'clock on the 28th of September
an exhausted mud spattered rider arrived
at Nonsuch palace he rushed up the
ground stairs through the garden
presence chambers pushing his way past
startled gentlemen ashes and outraged
ladies-in-waiting and burst unannounced
into the Queen's bedchamber there he
found Elizabeth newly risen and still in
her nightgown without her wig her makeup
and her ruff it was a sight that no man
had seen in 30 years Elizabeth the woman
without the trappings of Gloriana the
Queen and the man who had thus violated
the image of Elizabeth monarchy was
Robert Devereux Earl of Essex it was an
extraordinary affront to the Queen's
honour
Essex had returned in panic convinced
that Cecil was engineering his downfall
and desperate to plead his case he was
exhausted ill scarcely in his right mind
but the Queen was in no mood for
forgiveness
Elizabeth had stayed remarkably calm
when Essex burst into her bedchamber
later that afternoon the Earl was
summoned for private audience with the
Queen which quickly turned into an
interrogation why Elizabeth wanted to
know that he left Ireland without
permission why had he made so many
knights in defiance of his express
instructions
why above all had he made a truce with
that rebel and traitor
Tyrone the Earl answered as best he
could and then Elizabeth was left to
learn to ponder what she should do
towards ten o'clock at night she gave
orders that the Earl was to be put under
the form of house arrest the fall of the
favorite had begun
[Music]
a six was summoned before a public
tribunal
he spent 11 hours on his knees whilst a
list of his delinquencies was read out
in front of an invited audience
but even now the Queen could not bring
herself the destroy had his graced
favorite completely instead she sent him
into a sort of limbo she ordered him not
to attend the Privy Council she banned
him from her presence and she refused to
renew his lucrative monopoly on sweet
wines which threatened him with
bankruptcy
[Music]
a six was released to his London
residence Essex House
he was down but he wasn't quite finished
yet
he would make one final desperate bid
for power
[Music]
he would rebound
the scheme was quickly hatched the Earl
would capture the City of London and the
tower the Queen will be forced to summon
a parliament and to impeach Robert Cecil
an Essex will be declared Lord Protector
of England it was a harebrained scheme
but he might just work the Earl's
military followers would provide the
backbone of an army and Essex was so
popular with the people of London that
he was confident that they would rise in
his support
Essex wrote to James seeking his support
for the rising the Scots King was too
careful to commit himself but sent air
six a reply encode dispatched - envoy's
to meet him Essex had already done his
deal with the rebel Tyrone would back
the Earl's rising it was said in
exchange for power over our
and he have the support of one of the
London sheriffs as well as five other
disaffected Nobles to call the people of
London to arms
Essex his henchmen bribes Shakespeare's
company to stage a performance at the
Globe Essex chose the play it was
Richard the second
this scepter dial this earth of majesty
this seat of Mars this precious stone
set in the silver sea is now bound in
with shame within key blots and rotten
parchment bonds that England there was
won't to conquer others have made a
shameful conquest of itself
dawn of Gaunt is lamenting nostalgically
for a lost england a great country
fallen into ruin the stage is set for
the deposition of a corrupt and
overweening monarch by a once favored
and faithful nobleman the audience were
a mixed lot adventurers x ol Jers
papists malcolm tense but they shared a
common resentment for Elizabeth and her
England or was it Robert cecil's England
and they had a common loyalty to the
only conceivable alternative Robert
Devereux Earl of Essex
[Music]
early the following morning Elizabeth
received a report that Essex had left
his house at the head of a private army
they were marching up Fleet Street
calling the people of the city to arms
for the first time Elizabeth was in
personal danger in her own capital the
rebels were just two miles from the
court
[Music]
she acted quickly ordering her forces to
block the route to the palace by
building a barricade near Charing Cross
she sent royal harold's through the city
proclaiming Essex a traitor
the site of government troops and the
Herald's cry of treason made Londoners
think twice
they stayed behind closed doors
[Music]
Essex's force was confronted by troops
belonging to the Bishop of London
[Music]
Essex's page and two others were killed
by nightfall
the rebels were in retreat the hands or
cloaks covering their faces to try to
avoid recognition essex himself panicked
and fled back towards Essex House
[Music]
he barricaded himself in and set about
destroying incriminating evidence
including James's coded letter whilst
outside the Queen's forces trained
cannon on the house
[Music]
at 10:00 p.m. he surrendered
he was arrested along with 85 of his
co-conspirators including the Earl of
Southampton Shakespeare's patron when
she received the news
Elizabeth retired to bed Essex was tried
within a few days of the rebellion the
verdict was a foregone conclusion guilty
of high treason and condemned to a
traitor's death only the Queen could
confirm the sentence
it brought echoes of her past
[Music]
she had agonized for months before
authorizing the execution of her cousin
the Duke of Norfolk she had hesitated
for years before finally confirming the
death sentence on her fellow Queen Mary
Stuart
[Music]
she told the French ambassador that she
would willingly reprieve the life of her
disgraced favorite and that she was
partly to blame for allowing him to grow
so bold but it was clear she said that
the danger from him was so great that he
would have to die Essex was the only man
to challenge Elizabeth publicly and to
her face and he was the only one of her
subjects to try to rival her in
popularity here is enough
it was Essex himself who got to the
heart of the matter under interrogation
the Earl said that the state was not big
enough for them both Essex was executed
on Ash Wednesday the 25th of February 16
hundred and one he was 34 it took 3
blows of the axe to remove his head
[Music]
the change came over the Queen
but most of her life should enjoyed what
seemed like eternal youth now at 68
he seems suddenly old mind and body
all the fabric of my reign little by
little is beginning to fail
[Music]
with his rival dead Robert Cecil was now
unquestionably the most powerful man in
the country and behind the scenes his
plan for James to succeed Elizabeth was
maturing
[Music]
the king writing in code told Cecil that
he could look forward to greater favor
whilst he had the crown than he already
enjoyed under Elizabeth
[Music]
the future looked bright for sessile but
the present was troubled he'd never been
popular now the public really hated him
for killing their hero Essex
the regime was seen as stale and corrupt
and Cecil became the focus of blame for
the country's many ills a harvest had
failed the war in Ireland dragged on
taxes were heavy
and the Queen's own popularity was also
at all-time low for yours
she had rewarded her favorite courtiers
with grants called monopolies taxes on
everything from playing cards to soap
the policy aroused deep resentment in
the impoverished population we're
familiar with this kind of combination
of casual corruption and a government
that's been in power too long we call it
sleaze and the rot went right to the top
Elizabeth herself had been around longer
than everybody else at first her motto
semper eadem always the same and made
her seem a rock of stability in a
changeable world now she was merely an
obstacle to necessary reform
the unpopular Queen and her despised
Minister suffered a disaster they lost
control of Parliament MPs were
determined to break the hated monopoly
system the aging Queen was forced to
address Parliament in person to try to
rescue the situation if my kingly
bounties have been abused and if any in
authority under me have neglected or
perverted what I have committed to them
I hope God will not lay their offenses
in my charge for I do assure you there
is no prince that loves his subjects
better
there is no jewel be it or never so rich
a price which I place before this jewel
I mean your love and though you may have
many mightier and wiser Prince's sitting
in this seat yet you never had
nor shall have any that will love you
better
[Music]
I became known as the golden speech it
was Elizabeth's last great public
address and it was a consummate piece of
politics it is worth one the MPs over
not only by her unexpected announcement
that she was going to suspend and
investigate monopolies but also by her
language and sentiment the MPs show
their gratitude by voting unprecedented
ly heavy parliamentary taxation other
good news followed quickly as well there
was victory in Ireland a truce in the
war with Spain trade improved and at
last there was a good harvest Elizabeth
too seemed to rejuvenate in August she
rode for 10 miles and then went hunting
she was aged almost 69 and yet she
boasted she was in better health than
she'd been for ten years it was an
Indian summer glorious but brief it
could not last
[Music]
for God's sake let us sit upon the
ground and tell sad stories of the death
of kings
let's talk of graves of worms and
epitaphs
make dust out paper and with rainy eyes
write sorrow on the bosom of the earth
by March 1603 Elizabeth was in serious
decline she was suffering from ulcers in
the throat fever and lack of appetite
[Music]
against all advice she refused to go to
bed
Nestle unwisely insisted that she must
little man the word must is not to be
used to Prince's
but he know that I must die and that
makes these so presumptuous if you were
in the habit of seeing such things in
your bed as I do when in mind you would
not persuade me to go there
[Music]
after two weeks on the floor in the same
clothes Elizabeth asked her attendants
to get her to her feet
[Music]
but still she did not go to bed
instead she remains standing in total
silence for the next 15 hours
she appeared already in a manner
insensible holding her finger
continually in her mouth with her eyes
open and fixed to the ground as
Elizabeth's death approached a young man
was pacing the courtyards of the palace
he was Robert Carey the Queen's cousin
and he'd resolved to make his fortune in
the new reign by being the first to let
James know that Elizabeth was dead and
that he was king of England he informed
James of his intention and told him not
to leave Edinburgh then he returned to
the palace to watch and to wait but the
rest
[Music]
Elizabeth was preparing herself for the
end
[Music]
the archbishop kneeled down beside her
and examined her first of her faith and
she so punctually answered all his
questions by lifting up her eyes and
holding up her hand as it was a comfort
to all the beholders
then the good man told her plainly what
she was and what she was come to though
she had been long a great Queen here
upon earth yet shortly she was to yield
an account of her stewardship to the
King of Kings at 10 o'clock at night on
the 23rd of March 1603
elizabeth falls into a deep sleep she
never woke up
[Music]
three days later James the sixth was
proclaimed as Elizabeth's successor at
Holyrood palace in Edinburgh England and
Scotland were joined under one mark
Elizabeth's body was brought by water
from Richmond to Whitehall there it lay
for five weeks watched over day and
night by her ladies-in-waiting then it
was taken to Westminster Abbey for
burial the funeral effigy on top of the
coffin was so lifelike that from the
great crowds lining the route nothing
was heard but a general sighing groaning
and a weeping Elizabeth the woman was
dead but the achievement of Gloriana the
great Queen of England lived on
when Elizabeth came to the throne
England was an insignificant country
when she died it was a major European
power she had begun her reign by
promising to avoid the mistakes of her
sister Mary by a large she succeeded
Elizabeth had founded a national church
and she inspired a national literature
her father Henry the eighth's
had reinvented the idea of England
Elizabeth became its living embodiment
few monix have been better loved by
their subjects none has exercised a more
powerful whole over the imagination of
succeeding generations the myth started
with a few years of her death when the
preface to the King James Bible hails
her as that bright Occidental star Queen
Elizabeth a famous memory and the star
still burns bright
[Music]